.\" Manpage for Standard (?) Unix Notes
.\" aka notes
.\" See https://github.com/Standard-Unix-Notes/unix-notes
.TH notebook 1 "24 June 2021" "2.2" "Notes man page"
.SH NAME
Notes \-  GPG encrypted notes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B
notebook
[
.IB
command
] [
.I
filename
|
.I \fInotebook_name\fP
]

.SH DESCRIPTION 

The Standard(?) Unix Notes notebook system is a GPG encrypted 'notebook' where each note 
is individually encrypted into a notebook folder. It can handle multiple notebook folders 
and can decrypt/re-encrypt for a new GPG key easily. The program is based upon 
Password-Store the standard Unix password manager of which it borrows some code.

If no command is given then \fBnotebook\fP simply runs 'notebook help' which outputs a 
list of commands to STDOUT.


.SH COMMANDS 

The notes program takes a set of commands which allows the user to manipulate the 
encrypted notes in the system.
.RE

.SY help
.YS
Displays a quick help page displaying available commands.

.SY version
.YS
Displays the program version number.

.SY "show|ls|list"
.YS
List all notebooks in system.

.SY "default  notebook"
.YS
.OP notebook
Notebook will re-point the DEFAULT link to the specified notebook.
.PP
The default notebook is the notebook that will be used if no notebook is specified in the 
\fBnotebook used\fP command. This allows you to switch your default notebook for an period.
Specifying a new default notebook has NO effect on the notebook the \fBnotes\fP command will use to add|import|copy|rename|remove a note file.

.SY "use  [notebook]"
.YS
.OP notebook
If a notebook is specified then Notebook then Notebook will change the USE link to the 
specified notebook. This will make all future note(1) operations act upon the new 
notebook.

.SY "insert|add  notebook"
.YS
.OP notebook
Add a notebook to the system. The program takes the notebook title and replaces any 
spaces within it with underscores before creating a notebook directory. Adding a notebook 
does NOT change where notes are added. You will need to change the USE notebook using the 
\fBnotebook use notebook-name\fP command.

.SY "rename|mv  notebook"
.YS
.OP  notebook
Rename a notebook. Notebook will prompt for a new notebook title to be entered. Original 
encrypted notes are not changed as this only affects the directory name.

.SY "copy|cp  notebook"
.YS
.OP notebook
Duplicate a notebook in the SAME directory. The program will prompt for a new notebook title to 
be entered before copying the note to a new note title. The new notebook will be created with a copy of all notes in the original notebook directory.

.SY "delete|rm  notebook"
.YS
.OP notebook
Delete a notebook with the included notes inside. If GNU shred(1) is available notebook will use it to shred the files during deletion.

.SH NOTES

The program comes with a sister program called \fBnotes\fP that is used to manage the 
notes inside the notebooks. See \fBnotes(1)\fP for details.

.SH OPTIONS 

Most commands take a \fBnotebook\fP parameter. The notes and notebook commands strip 
spaces from note filenames and notebook directory names. It replaces them with 
underscores. This behaviour occurs even if the user encloses the notebook name with spaces in 
quotes because there are other issues that occur when handling notes with spaces in 
particularly when replacing the encryption key.

.SH EXIT STATUS

Upon an error notes returns a non zero value upon aborting.

.SH FILES

The following links point to the default and current notebooks.

.TP
\fBDEFAULT\fP
This link points to the default notebook (notes). This can be reassigned by using the 
command 'notebook default <notebook name>'.


.TP
\fBUSE \fP
This link points to the currently used notebook. It can be changed by issuing the command 
'notebook use <notebook name>'. You can also set this to the default notebook by omitting 
the notebook name parameter.

.SH CONFORMANCE

The script is written to use the Bourne Shell and avoid all Bash-isms (which would have 
made the coding a little easier in some cases. Although Bash is installed by default on 
most Linuxes, it is not installed by default on a number of other Unix-like operating 
systems including FreeBSD.

This is deliberate as all Unix and Linux systems should have a POSIX compliant shell (or 
at least be backwards compatible to one). Hence the application was written for the 
lowest common denominator.

.SH NOTEBOOKS

There is currently no sync built into this application. However, the user can simply run 
a rsync or scp in order to synchronise between two machines running Notes.

.SH BUGS

See https://github.com/Standard-Unix-Notes/unix-notes/issues for details on any Bugs and 
Issues with the project.

Please report any bugs on the GitHub page.

.SH EXAMPLES

.EX
Show help:
\fB$ notebook\fP 

Add a notebook called 'work' 
\fB$ notebook add work\fP

Add note called project_plans 
\fB$ notebook add project plans\fP

Rename notebook 'work':
\fB$ notebook rename work\fP
Please enter new name for note: installation instructions 
/home/ian/.notes/USE/mynote.gpg exists .... moving

List available notebooks: 
\fB$ notebook list\fP
project_plans/                  work_notes/

Delete a notebook:
\fB$ notebook rm work notes\fP

.EE

.SH SEE ALSO

.IP \fBnotes(1)\fP The companion command for managing notes inside notebook(1).
.IP \fBjournal(1)\fP The companion command for maintaining a daily journal.

.SH PROJECT PAGE
.UR https://github.com/Standard-Unix-Notes/unix-notes
GitHub Project page
.UE

.SS ROADMAP
.UR https://github.com/Standard-Unix-Notes/unix-notes/raw/ROADMAP.md
Project GitHub
.UE

.SS CONTRIBUTING 

Contributions are welcome, see CONTRIBUTING.md in the tarball or in the 
.UR https://github.com/Standard-Unix-Notes/unix-notes/raw/CONTRIBUTING.md
GitHub repository
.UE

.SS LICENCE

The Standard(?) Unix Notes program is licensed under the BSD 3-clause licence.

.SS AUTHOR

Ian Stanley can be contacted via project 
.UR https://github.com/iandstanley
GitHub page
.UE
